---
layout: default
title: Glossary
nav_order: 4
---

# Glossary terms

### Common Data Element
A common data element are standardized key terms or concepts, established so that they may be used in studies, to enhance data quality and reusability over time.

### Community-defined data reporting guidelines
A community-defined data reporting guideline is a well-defined data format or document that provides information on data achiving and sharing across the community. Most of the community defined guidelines can be found on [FAIRSharing.org](https://fairsharing.org/search?fairsharingRegistry=Standard).

### Contextual Metadata
Definition

### Controlled terminologies
A controlled terminology is an organized list of terms for the purpose of curation and normalization of data record annotation. Hence, they are list of indexed terms that can be retrieved by simple browsing and querying.

### Data Dictionary
A data dictionary is a document systematically listing and defining the all data variables recorded / used in a dataset. data variable definition includes provide *Term metadata*, which describe the entity, but also allowed values for that variable, which are know a variable value sets.

### Data Discovery vs Data Searching
Definition

### Data Element Level
Definition

### Data Exchange Model
A data exchange model is a type of data model specialized devised to enable the transfer of information between systems.

### Data Model/Schema
A data model is a formal representation of a domain which identified key entities and relations between them.

### Data Object
Definition

### Data Variable
A data variable is an information entity which can be defined in a data dictionary, which has a type and which can assume a range of values.

### Dataset
A dataset in the context of the FAIR-DSM model is a data structure that is purposed for FAIR sharing. A dataset in FAIR-DSM-L-1 is a flexible container for any collection of data that is expected to be hosted and served for FAIR data sharing, i.e., Datasets can contain unstructured (e.g., image files) or structured (e.g. clinical data or lab data) data.  Starting with FAIR-DSM-L-2 to FAIR-DSM-L-5, a dataset is expected to refer to a container for structured data, composed of a set of fields and each field is composed of a set of values (value set). In the majority of cases a dataset will be a tabular data structure (delimited text file) or a hierarchical data structure (json or xml)

### Dataset Descriptor
A data descriptor is a metadata record of the dataset which provides information about a dataset.

### Dataset Field
A dataset field is an attribute of the dataset, which may be defined in the dataset model (local) or a data model (global).

### Dataset Field Values
Dataset field values is a collection of information entities which are allowed for a given dataset field.

### Dataset Model
A dataset model is a formal representation devised for a dataset.

### Domain Entity
A domain entity is a information element (a type, a concept) core to the description of a given knowledge area.

### Domain Model
Definition

### Field Level Metadata
Definition

### General Purpose Metadata Schema
Definition

### Generic Data Model
Definition

### Indentifiable Dataset
Definition

### Key Master Data Entities
Definition

### Linked Data Representation
Definition

### Machine-Interpretable Format
Definition

### Machine-Readable Format
A machine readable format is a information representation specifying how to serialize (write) information/data in ways software agents can handle.

### Master Data Entity
The conceptual entity about which the observed or measured data is reported in the dataset(s). E.g., chemical compound, biospecimen, human subject, animal subject, cell-line.

### Metadata Record
A metadata record is an instance of a metadata schema denoting/describing an entity, digital or otherwise.

### Metadata Registry
Definition

### Metadata Schema
A metadata schema is a formal representation / specification which defines a set of descriptors needed to denote an entity.

### Minimum Information Reporting Guidelines
A minimum information reporting guideline consist of sets of guidelines and formats for reporting data derived by specific high-throughput methods. Their purpose is to ensure the data generated by these methods can be easily verified, analysed and interpreted by the wider scientific community.

### Ontology Terms
An ontology term is a entity defined in a semantic data model or a pre-defined ontology. it can be a Class/type or a Property/relation.

### Project Dataset
Definition

### Reference Data Entity
Definition

### Reference Field
Definition

### Reporting Guideline
A reporting guideline is a document, usually available as unstructure text, outlining annotation requirements in a specific domain for the purpose of data archiving, exchange and reporting.

### Resolvable Identifier
Definition

### Semantic Data Model
Semantic data model is a type of data model where all entities (classes and relations) are either defined as an ontology using formal semantics (ie the semantic data model is an ontology) or where all entities and relations between entities have been mapped to one or more ontologies.

### Standard Generic Dataset Model
Definition

### Structured Dataset
A structured dataset is a information object which is represented according to some principled ways, thus adding contraints and structure to information representation.

### Study Design
Definition

### Study Design Element
Definition

### Term Metadata
Definition

### Tidy Data Principles
Definition

### Value Level Metadata
Definition
